---
layout:     Blog/post
title:      "Income, Non-Cognitive Skills & Grit"
date:       2016-07-21 12:00:00
author:     "R.V. Swift"
header-img: "img/Blog/income-non-cognitive-grit.jpg"
---
<h2 class="section-heading">Non-Cognitive Skills: Their Importance and Stratification Along Income Lines</h2>

Non-cognitive skills, which aren’t specifically intellectual and analytical in nature – like motivation, effort, self-regulation, resilience, and pro-social behavior, to name a few – are increasingly being recognized as important predictors of academic success. This makes sense intuitively – all other things being equal, would you rather work with someone that is motivated and resilient, or someone who is not? In a certain sense, non-cognitive skills are linked to those qualities we think of as character, and character matters for its own sake. As Abraham Lincoln said,

<blockquote>Reputation is the shadow. Character is the tree.</blockquote>

But beyond intuitive value and the link between non-cognitive skills and personal character, empirical studies have shown that the development of non-cognitive skills is positively correlated with improved academic outcomes and labor productivity and earnings. For example, in an extensive meta-analysis of over 200 interventions directed at increasing the socio-emotional skills of K-12 students, <a class="blog-link" href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01564.x/abstract;jsessionid=22713A52AF73CBE873C271B05632AA0A.f04t03" target="\_blank">Durlak et al. (2011)</a> found that interventions can build non-cognitive skills, and that the acquisition of these skills leads to improved academic performance. These observations imply that cognitive development is supported by non-cognitive skills. In addition to a tight coupling with cognitive development and effecting positive academic outcomes, non-cognitive skills are also valued by employers. For example, according to a recent Economic Policy Institute briefing paper <a class="blog-link" href="http://www.epi.org/publication/the-need-to-address-noncognitive-skills-in-the-education-policy-agenda/" target="\_blank">(García, 2014)</a>, a survey of over 400 U.S. employers indicates that they value oral communication, teamwork and collaboration, professionalism and work ethic, and critical thinking and problem solving over more traditional academic skills like writing, mathematics and a knowledge of science, history, and geography – “soft skills” are important.

Despite the importance of non-cognitive skills, little is known about their economic determinants. In a recent research paper published in the National Bureau of Economic Research, <a class="blog-link" href="http://www.nber.org/papers/w22168" target="\_blank">Fletcher and Wolfe (2016)</a> partly fill this gap. By tracking children from kindergarten to the fifth grade, they found a strong correlation between family income and non-cognitive skill development. Not only did children from higher income families enter schools with better-developed non-cognitive skills, these advantages grew as the children aged. The results were robust to differences in children’s health, differences in parental non-cognitive skills, and differences in the non-cognitive skills of the children’s classmates. In other words, income was the primary driver.

Low income likely impairs the development of non-cognitive skills for the same reasons that it impairs cognitive development and adversely impacts health. Children in low-income families have less access to health care, increasing school absences. Low-income parents are more likely to be less educated, and they are more likely to work low paying jobs as a result. Lower pay means that they have to work longer hours (or more jobs) to make ends meet. Longer hours translates to more time away from home and less time to nurture and guide their children. Lower income families are also less able to provide enriching after school opportunities for their children. And, because they are less educated, they are generally less vocal advocates for their children's educations. Poverty is crippling.

<h2 class="section-heading">Grit & its critics</h2>

With the exception of being “non-cognitive,” socio-emotional skills are somewhat amorphous <a class="blog-link" href="http://www.epi.org/publication/the-need-to-address-noncognitive-skills-in-the-education-policy-agenda/" target="\_blank">(García, 2014)</a>, and a wide array of skills fits under the non-cognitive umbrella. Grit, or the perseverance and passion for long-term goals tempered by resilience in the face of failure, is one of these. Largely propelled by <a class="blog-link" href="https://amzn.com/1501111108" target="\_blank_">Angela Duckworth’s best-selling book (2016)</a>, grit has gained a significant amount of popular media attention, and it is increasingly being seen as an important educational outcome <a class="blog-link" href="http://www.npr.org/sections/ed/2016/05/25/479172868/angela-duckworth-responds-to-a-new-critique-of-grit" target="\_blank">(despite recent critical reservations)</a>.

Passionate perseverance and resilience in the face of failure are good things. So directed interventions to improve grit in students would seem to be a good thing too, yet the importance of such interventions has been criticized. Detractors say that in focusing on grit, we are ignoring the broader context of institutionalized poverty and the problems that it creates. Because poverty often cuts along color lines, there are racial undertones. As Paul Thomas, a former high school English teacher and current teacher educator at Furman University<a class="blog-link" href="https://radicalscholarship.wordpress.com/2014/01/30/the-grit-narrative-grit-research-and-codes-that-blind/" target="\_blank"> puts it (2014)</a>:

<blockquote>In fact, part of the “grit” narrative includes the assumption that successful students and people (read “white”) are successful primarily because they work hard; they earn their success. The flip side of this “grit” narrative is that unsuccessful students and people (read “African American” and “Latino/a”) are unsuccessful because they simply do not try hard enough. At its worst, the “grit” narrative is a socially acceptable way of expressing the lazy African American stereotype.</blockquote>

In other words, teaching grit in the schools is just another way of imposing character intervention, grounded in ingrained racial stereotypes, as a solution to a problem engendered by poverty. In pursuing this course, we are perpetuating these stereotypes and propping up a system where being born into poverty is the best predictor of becoming a poor adult. The underdevelopment of non-cognitive skills in low-income children that Fischer and Wolfe point out is yet another unsettling example of the interlocking systems of structural discrimination that maintain socio-economic stratification in our country.

But while the findings of Fischer and Wolfe support critics such as Thomas, they also indicate that the criticism can be viewed from at least two different perspectives - that of educational policy and that of an average teacher or school administrator. And while Thomas  critics may be misguided. A move to address the underling problem – poverty – and the mechanisms that perpetuate it, is commendable. It is a task that should be taken on. But it is one that requires an overlapping focus on social, education and economic reform, as well as the ability to institute appropriate policies – a requirement that is far larger than any teacher or school administration team. On the other hand, integrating practical courses of remediation aimed at improving non-cognitive skills is not. Yes, institutionalized discrimination is normative and largely ignored in the United States, but focusing on this at the cost of ignoring the underdevelopment of non-cognitive skills when realistic solutions (in the form of interventions or integrated curriculum) are available is irresponsible. As an aspiring teacher, the natural, big, open-ended question that follows is this - what is the best pedagogical recourse to improve non-cognitive skills development, and how can I effectively bring it into my classroom?

<h2 class="site-heading">References</h2>

Durlak, J.A., Weissberg R.P., Dymnicki A.B., Taylor R.D., & Schellinger K.B. (2011). The Impact of Enhancing Students’ Social and Emotional Learning: A Meta-Analysis of School-Based Universal Interventions. Child Development, 82(1), 405 – 432. DOI: <a class="blog-link" href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01564.x/abstract;jsessionid=22713A52AF73CBE873C271B05632AA0A.f04t03" target="\_blank">10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01564.x</a>

García, E. (2014). The Need to Address Noncognitive Skills in the Educational Policy Agenda. EPI Briefing Paper #386. Retrieved from Economic Policy Institute Website: <a class="blog-link" href="http://www.epi.org/publication/the-need-to-address-noncognitive-skills-in-the-education-policy-agenda/" target="\_blank">http://www.epi.org/publication/the-need-to-address-noncognitive-skills-in-the-education-policy-agenda/</a>.

Fletcher, J., & Wolfe, B.L. (2016). The Importance of Family Income in the Formation and Evolution of Non-Cognitive Skills in Childhood. NBER Working Paper No. 22168. Retrieved from: <a class="blog-link" href="http://www.nber.org/papers/w22168" target="\_blank">http://www.nber.org/papers/w22168</a>.

<a class="blog-link" href="https://amzn.com/1501111108" target="\_blank">Duckworth, A. (2016). Grit. The Power of Passion and Perseverance. New York, NY: Scribner.</a>

Thomas, P.L. (2014, January, 30). The “Grit” Narrative, “Grit” Research, and Codes that Blind. [Web log post]. Retrieved from: <a class="blog-link" href="https://radicalscholarship.wordpress.com/2014/01/30/the-grit-narrative-grit-research-and-codes-that-blind/" target="\_blank">https://radicalscholarship.wordpress.com/2014/01/30/the-grit-narrative-grit-research-and-codes-that-blind/</a>.
